## Methods 

### Strain construction

All plasmids were constructed using isothermal assembly [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.1318] of fragments generated by PCR or double stranded DNA synthesis (IDT, Coralville) and transformed into Top10 E. coli cells (5-1600-020, IBA Life Sciences, Göttingen). Transformants were screened by colony PCR and verified by sequencing. Purified plasmids were transformed into *E. coli* strain MG1655 by growing 3 mL of culture in SOB media at 30 °C to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.4, washing twice with 1 mL ice-cold water, resuspending in 40 µL water, electroporating 1—10 ng plasmid with the EC1 setting of a Micropulser (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules), and recovering for 1 hour at 37 °C in SOC media before plating on selective LB-agar.

To generate pJS101 with a compatible backbone, plasmid pZH509 [@pmid:29084263] was used as a template to amplify the bicistronic regulatory construct including the P~LtetO-1~ promoter [@pmid:9092630], GFPmut2 [@pmid:8707053], tn10 TetR [@doi:10.1093/nar/12.12.4849] and rrnB T1 transcription terminator [@pmid:8887568]. This was assembled by isothermal assembly with the backbone from pGB2 [@pmid:6098521] with the pSC101 origin of replication and spectinomycin resistance to generate plasmid pJS101. Plasmid pJS102 was generated by 3-fragment isothermal assembly. Plasmid pZH509 was used as a template both for the vector backbone and for GFPmut2, with non-homologous extensions added to PCR primers to generate the P~LlacO-1~ promoter [@pmid:9092630]. LacI [@pmid:16591435] was amplified from *E. coli* MG1655 by colony PCR.

The test strain for mRNA imaging, ZHX99, was constructed similarly to ZHX222 in recent work [@arxiv:1506.08596]. In ZHX99, a construct in which a fusion protein of mVenus and Cro is expressed from the bacteriophage λ promoter *P~R~* was integrated into the chromosome to replace the *lac* operon in MG1655 [@pmid:10829079]. ZHX99 differs from ZHX222 in three ways. First, the *P~R~* promoter was weakened by site-directed mutagenesis to produce a strain with lower mRNA levels. Second, a very strong ribosome binding site was added (RBS #136 [@pmid:24234441]). Lastly, 24 tandem repeats of the recognition sequence for the PP7 coat protein (PP7cp) were inserted between the open reading frame and transcription terminator (amplified by PCR from pDZ251 [@pmid:21512033]). The pZH713 plasmid for mRNA detection was constructed by replacing GFPmut2 in pJS102 with a fusion protein of SYFP2 (amplified from a plasmid [@pmid:16716067]) and PP7cp (generated by codon optimization and DNA synthesis based on previously reported sequences [@pmid:22735544]). Additionally, in pZH713 the PP7cp-SYFP2 fusion protein is translated from the weak ribosome binding site from pZH511 [@pmid:29084263]. We note that mVenus expression in ZHX99 is extremely low (undetectable without strong laser excitation) and does not interfere with mRNA detection by localizing up to 48 SYFP2 molecules in a diffraction-limited spot bound to a single mRNA molecule.

To test independent induction of two genes, GFPmut2 in pJS102 was replaced by mScarlet-I (amplified from a plasmid [@pmid:28931898]) to make pDG101. Plasmids were co-transformed into MG1655 by electroporation following the above protocol, except with 1 µL each undiluted plasmid (20—40 ng) and selecting on LB-agar plates with both spectinomycin and carbenicillin. Sequence maps are included in **File S2** and plasmids useful for constructing additional two-gene expression systems (pJS101 and pJS102, **Table {@tbl:plasmidList}**) are available from AddGene (deposit numbers 118280 and 118281) and have been verified by NGS [@url:https://www.addgene.org/Zach_Hensel/].

| Plasmid | Ori | Promoter | GOI | Repressor Expression | Reference |
|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| pZH501 | p15a | CI-SNAP-tag | ~LtetO-1~ | bicistronic | [@pmid:29084263] |
| pZH509 | p15a | GFPmut2 |  P~LtetO-1~ | bicistronic | [@pmid:29084263] |
| pJS101 | pSC101 | GFPmut2 | P~LtetO-1~ | bicistronic | This work |
| pJS102 | p15a | GFPmut2 | P~LlacO-1~ | bicistronic | This work |
| pZH713 | p15a | PP7cp-SYFP2 | P~LlacO-1~  | bicistronic | This work |
| pDG101 | p15a | mScarlet-I | P~LlacO-1~  | bicistronic | This work |

Table: Plasmids used in this study. {#tbl:plasmidList}

### Characterization of GFP expression by flow cytometry

All flow cytometry experiment were repeated 3 times on different days and used plasmids transformed by electroporation into *E. coli* MG1655. Cultures were grown overnight at 30 °C from LB-agar plates supplemented with carbenicillin or spectinomycin (both at 50 $\mu g /mL$) in 1 mL EZ Rich Defined Medium (M2105, Teknova, Hollister) supplemented with the same antibiotics. Cells were reinoculated 1:400 in 1 mL of the same media supplemented with Isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG, at concentrations of 0, 2, 4.5, 10, 22.4, 50, 111.8, 250, 559, and 1250 µM) or anhydrotetrycline (ATc, at concentrations of 1, 5, 25, and 125 nM) as indicated and grown at 30 °C for 4—4.5 hours until reaching an optical density at 600 nm of 0.2—0.3. Next, 10 µL of cells were added to 1 mL of PBS at pH 7.4 and examined by flow cytometry.

Flow cytometry data was collected on an S3e cell sorter (Bio-Rad, Hercules) using a target flow rate of 2,000 counts/s and collecting 30,000 counts for each sample. A 488-nm laser line was used for excitation at its maximum power setting with amplification settings of 450 (forward scattering, FSC), 350 (side scattering, SSC), and 900 (FL1, 525/30 nm). The cell sorter is calibrated daily for a linear response to sample fluorescence intensity. Acquisition was triggered by forward scattering with a threshold of 3. Data was exported as an FCS file and imported into a custom Python script using FlowCal [@pmid:27110723]. Following previous methods [@pmid:29084263], one third of samples were selected based on proximity to the peak of FSC-AREA and SSC-HEIGHT in a 2D histogram using the density2d method in FlowCal. The FL1-AREA measurements were used to estimate the mean and variance of GFP distributions for all samples. This was done by estimating the probability density functions in bins distributed equally in logarithmic space and fitting by least squares minimization to a gamma function. We found that this method reduced the influence of low-FL1-AREA events that escaped other gating steps, and which had frequencies that varied for different samples and days (**Figure {@fig:gammaFits}**). In all plots, the mean fluorescence of a strain harboring a similar plasmid, pZH501, that does not encode a fluorescent protein, was subtracted [@pmid:29084263]. The script for data analysis as well as all raw FCS data is available in **File S2** and utilized modules from SciPy, NumPy, Matplotlib, and Pandas.

### Microscopy

For microscopy, cells were grown similarly to the protocol for flow cytometry, except that overnight cultures were diluted 1:100 and imaged after 2—4 hours of growth with induction. For mRNA imaging, cells were grown in M9 media supplemented with 1X MEM Amino Acids (M9A) or M9A additionally supplemented with 1% SOB media. For 2-plasmid imaging, cells were grown in EZ Rich media. Cells were imaged on agarose gel pads (3% BP165-25, Fisher Bio-Reagents) diluted in M9A (for mRNA imaging) or PBS (for 2-plasmid imaging). For mRNA imaging, the microscope sample chamber was maintained at 30 °C. All imaging was done on a Leica DMI6000 inverted microscope using illumination from a Leica EL6000 source (at various intensities ensuring minimal photobleaching during acquisition), fluorescence filter cubes (Leica GFP ET, a custom filter set with Semrock filters FF01-561/13, FF02-616/73, and DI02-R561, or the Semrock LF514-B filter set), a 100x/1.46 a-plan apochromat oil immersion objective, and an Evolve 512 EM-CCD camera (Photometrics). Images were prepared using Fiji [@pmid:22743772], with linear scaling and maintaining minimum and maximum intensity values for all comparable images.