## Results 

### Moving bicistronic autoregulatory construct to a compatible plasmid backbone

The first step in creating a low-noise system for tuning expression of two genes was to establish that a previously characterized, bicistronic autoregulatory circuit functions well in a compatible plasmid backbone. In this expression system, GFP and TetR are expressed bicistronically from the TetR-repressible promoter P~LtetO-1~ and expression is induced by the addition of ATc [@pmid:29084263]. This system was shown to have low noise and a linearized dose response compared to a system in which TetR was constitutively expressed. We moved the system from a plasmid with a p15A replicon conferring ampicillin resistance to a lower-copy-number plasmid with a pSC101 replicon conferring spectinomycin resistance [@pmid:6098521]. The p15A and pSC101 replicons have been used together in multiplasmid systems [@pmid:21933410].

GFP expression mean and noise were characterized from low to high levels of induction by flow cytometry. **Figure {@fig:pZH509-pJS101}** shows that pJS101 induces at similar ATc concentrations as pZH509, with the change to the lower-copy pSC101 backbone resulting in a 58% drop in mean expression levels at a wide range of ATc concentrations. For a similar expression system in the absence of autoregulated TetR expression, moving the P~LtetO-1~ promoter from a p15A to a pSC101 backbone resulted in an 87% drop in expression [@pmid:9092630]. A smaller change was expected in our experiment, since negative autoregulation provided dosage compensation, just as autoregulation can reduce noise in plasmid copy number [@pmid:16883354; @pmid:10850721; @pmid:14749823].

![**Moving the TetR expression system to a compatible plasmid backbone.** Cultures of *E. coli* MG1655 harboring pZH509 (p15a origin, blue) or pJS101 (pSC101 origin, orange) expressing GFPmut2 with bicistronic autoregulation by TetR were grown at 30 °C in rich media with induction of 1, 5, 25 and 125 nM ATc. Mean single-cell GFP fluorescence was estimated using flow cytometry. Mean GFP levels in 3 independent replicates are indicated with different shapes. Black lines indicate the mean plus or minus 1 standard error of the mean from the 3 replicates.](images/Fig1_pZH509_pJS101.png){#fig:pZH509-pJS101 width=89mm}

### An alternative regulatory construct with LacI replacing TetR

We hypothesized that replacing P~LtetO-1~ with the IPTG-inducible promoter P~LlacO-1~,  with similar characteristics [@pmid:9092630], and replacing TetR with LacI might result in a similarly useful expression system that could be tuned independently. However, regulatory parameters for TetR and LacI vary significantly. TetR binds *tetO2* more strongly than LacI binds *lacO1* (approximately 0.5—1.0 kcal/mol difference in binding energy [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkh200; @pmid:2182324] for a single site, with 2 tandem sites in our constructs). And, TetR binds ATc much more strongly than LacI binds IPTG (over 3 orders of magnitude difference in typical concentrations required for half-induction [@pmid:10978179; @pmid:16432263]).

We first characterized induction of GFP expression in MG1655 cells harboring IPTG-inducible pJS102 by flow cytometry. **Figure {@fig:pJS102-mean-noise}a** shows an induction range of almost 2 orders of magnitude from 0 to 1250 µM IPTG, with very good reproducibility of induction levels in 3 independent experiments. Previous experiments with the TetR-based system showed a similar total dynamic range, but with a large jump in expression going from 0 nM to 0.5 nM ATc [@pmid:29084263]. This effect is not seen for pJS102, suggesting that switching from TetR:ATc to LacI:IPTG improves the dynamic range of tunable induction levels to a small extent.

![**Characterizing mean expression levels and noise for different gene expression systems.** Cultures of *E. coli* MG1655 harboring pJS102 (LacI regulation, p15a origin, green), pZH509 (TetR regulation, p15a origin, blue) or pJS101 (TetR regulation, pSC101 origin, orange) were grown at 30 °C in rich media with induction by IPTG (0, 2, 4.5, 10, 22.4, 50, 111.8, 250, 559 and 1250 µM) or ATc (1, 5, 25 and 125 nM). Mean single-cell GFP fluorescence and GFP expression noise was estimated using flow cytometry. Data from 3 independent replicates are indicated with different shapes. Black lines indicate the mean GFP expression and expression noise plus or minus 1 standard error of the mean from the 3 replicates. (**a**) Mean GFP expression for pJS102 at different IPTG concentrations shows tunable and reproducible induction over an ~50-fold dynamic range. Expression at zero IPTG is plotted separately to fit on logarithmic scale. (**b**) GFP expression noise as a function of mean for pZH509, pJS101 and pJS102. For all samples, GFP mean increases monotonically with inducer concentration. Note that the full range of induction is not shown here for pZH509 and pJS101 as even 1 nM ATc induces expression. GFP expression noise is low in all conditions for all strains.](images/Fig2_pJS102_mean_noise.png){#fig:pJS102-mean-noise width=183mm}

Next, we compared noise in protein expression, with the concern that the *lac* operon present in the MG1655 host strain could lead to all-or-none expression at intermediate IPTG concentrations [@pmid:16590055]. However, **Figure {@fig:pJS102-mean-noise}b** shows low noise in GFP expression at all IPTG concentrations, with noise levels comparable to pZH509 and pJS102 at the same mean GFP levels. Note that apparently high noise at very low expression was partially due to measurement noise, and, at any rate, was much lower than noise when expression is regulated by a constitutively expressed repressor [@pmid:29084263].

We found that side scattering was weakly correlated with fluorescence, and thus with cell size, so gating for scattering modestly reduced measured noise in fluorescence intensity. However, we are comparing to an "extrinsic noise limit" determined from measurements of cell fluorescence divided by cell area [@doi:10.1126/science.1188308], which effectively does the same thing. In practice, we observed slightly lower noise measurements for GFP concentration in fluorescence microscopy images compared to total GFP fluorescence in the gated flow cytometry sample for similarly induced strains. This difference was more significant for very-low-expression conditions, and noise in conditions where GFP fluorescence distributions significantly overlapped with ungated background events (GFP intensity less than 10^4^ in **Figure {@fig:gammaFits}**) was somewhat overestimated. Our noise measurements were also consistent with the lower limit of gene expression noise  found in many *E. coli* promoters using a similar flow cytometry method with similar gating and fitting procedures [@pmid:22275871].

### Using the new induction system for detection of single mRNA in living *E. coli*

Recently, an improved method for detection of mRNA by local enrichment of fluorescent RNA-binding proteins was reported in *S. cerevisiae* [@pmid:29131164]. This reduced the aggregation of mRNAs bound by the bacteriophage MS2 coat protein, which has also caused mRNA immortalization that has limited experiments in *E. coli* to observing transcription just after induction [@pmid:16360033]. We hypothesized that aggregation could be reduced by reducing the expression levels of both mRNA and mRNA-binding proteins, and by having low cell-to-cell variation in expression. We developed a strain in which mRNA molecules encode mVenus-Cro and also include 24 tandem repeats of the binding sequence for the PP7 coat protein (PP7cp) [@pmid:21512033]. These mRNAs were constitutively expressed at low levels (less than 1 molecule per cell). Plasmid pJS102 was used as a template to develop a fluorescent, IPTG-inducible reporter of expression, PP7cp-SYFP2.

We tested the utility of this expression system for tuning low-noise gene expression in different growth conditions. In previous experiments, we expressed the RNA-binding protein from a constitutive promoter integrated into the chromosome; this required long cycles of optimization every time a parameter was changed (e.g. growth media, temperature, and fluorescent protein sequence) that changed protein expression levels. **Figure {@fig:pZH713-optimization}a**  shows that single-molecule mRNA detection was optimal (fluorescent mRNA spots are sufficiently bright but not obscured by background) at 100 µM IPTG in minimal media supplemented with 1% rich media. We note the absence of pole-localized fluorescent spots that characterize mRNA aggregation [@pmid:20562858], and we observed reasonable mRNA lifetimes of a few minutes in time-lapse imaging.

We moved to minimal media to explore a growth condition with different mRNA expression levels and slower growth rates, but found that 100 µM IPTG gave a background of unbound PP7cp-SYFP2 molecules that often made it impossible to detect mRNA spots. **Figure {@fig:pZH713-optimization}b** shows how the IPTG-inducible expression system made it simple to quickly scan different PP7cp-SYFP2 induction conditions and identify 10–20 µM IPTG as a range in which PP7cp-SYFP2 levels were high enough to label single mRNAs, but not so high as to give a high background of unbound molecules. Lastly, we note that the strain used for mRNA imaging has its entire *lac* operon replaced by the synthetic construct. Thus, this expression system works well both in the presence and absence of the *lac* operon.

![**Using IPTG to tune expression of a fluorescent RNA-binding protein for single mRNA detection in different growth conditions.** ZHX99 cells were grown with low expression levels (less than 1 molecule per cell) of mRNAs harboring 24 tandem binding sites for the PP7 coat protein fused to SYFP2. Cells were spotted on agarose gel pads and YFP fluorescence images were acquired.  Two example images are shown for each condition. Images were taken shortly after preparing samples, so adjacent cells were not usually closely related in cell lineages. (**a**) PP7cp-SYFP2 was induced with 100 µM IPTG to detect single mVenus-Cro mRNA molecules in supplemented media and minimal media conditions; in minimal media there was too high a PP7cp-SYFP expression level to see single mRNA spots above background. Scale bar 4 µm. (**b**) Using the pJS102 expression system, PP7cp-SYFP2 expression levels were varied by induction with 5, 10, 20 and 40 µM IPTG. The range of 10—20 µM IPTG was identified to give bright mRNA spots above the background of unbound PP7cp-SYFP2 molecules. Scale bar 2 µm.](images/Fig3_pZH713_optimization.png){#fig:pZH713-optimization width=89mm}

### Independent, tunable expression of two genes

Lastly, we tested whether ATc-inducible and IPTG-inducible plasmids could be combined to achieve low-noise expression of two genes in the same cell. We replaced GFPmut2 in pJS102 with the fast-maturing RFP mScarlet-I [@pmid:28931898] to create the plasmid pDG101. This plasmid was co-transformed with pJS101 into *E. coli* MG1655, and green and red fluorescence were compared at different combinations of ATc and IPTG concentrations. **Figure {@fig:pJS101-pDG101}a** shows that pJS101 induction by ATc was unaffected by pDG101 induction by IPTG, and that all conditions gave low noise in GFP concentration. **Figure {@fig:pJS101-pDG101}b** shows that mScarlet-I expression from pDG101 was similarly unaffected by the level of pJS101 induction by ATc. **Figure {@fig:pJS101-pDG101}c** and **{@fig:pJS101-pDG101}d** shows that mean expression levels were reproducible in 3 independent replicates, with low noise in each sample across a 5-fold increase in expression levels. There is some day-to-day variation in mean expression levels, but for each replicate induction of GFPmut2 and mScarlet-I is independent. Thus, independent, tunable expression of two genes can be achieved by replacing GFPmut2 in pJS101 and pJS102 with other genes of interest and co-transforming the plasmids into *E. coli*. 

![**Independence of induction of TetR and LacI systems.** MG1655 cells harboring pJS101 (ATc-inducible expression of GFP, pSC101 origin) and pDG101 (IPTG-inducible expression of mScarlet-I, p15a origin) were grown with different combinations of IPTG and ATc concentrations. GFP and mScarlet-I fluorescence was observed and quantified by fluorescence microscopy. (**a**) GFP fluorescence showed no apparent influence of IPTG on ATc-induced expression of GFP for cells grown at 30 °C in EZ-RICH media. (**b**) For the same cells as in **a**, no influence of ATc was observed on IPTG-induced expression of mScarlet-I. Scale bar 3 µm. (**c**,**d**) Cells were grown at 37 °C in M9A media in 3 independent replicates, and the mean and noise of GFP and mScarlet-I fluorescence intensities (from the average intensities of pixels within cells) were estimated at different IPTG (50, 1250 µM) and ATc (5, 125 nM) concentrations. Translation was inhibited with chloramphenicol for 1 hour prior to preparing microscope samples in order to allow for fluorescent protein maturation. Colored circles indicate the results from independent replicates. For mean expression levels in **c**, black lines indicate the mean GFP and mScarlet-I expression plus or minus 1 standard error of the mean from the 3 replicates. Noise measurements in **d** indicate low noise in both channels in all conditions and replicates.](images/Fig4_pJS101_pDG101.png){#fig:pJS101-pDG101 width=89mm}