## Discussion

### Implementing low-noise expression systems

Using modern molecular cloning techniques, it is simple to replace GFPmut2 in pJS101 and pJS102 with genes of interest by PCR and isothermal assembly with near 100% efficiency and a low probability of clones with incorrect sequence. The apparent insensitivity of this circuit to regulatory parameters (DNA and inducer binding affinities) suggests that it can be easily extended to a third, repressor-based expression system. Further, additional ribosome binding sites can be added to the bicistronic operon to express additional components. Notably, we have found that the ATc- and IPTG-inducible systems both function well in MG1655, a strain in which the *lac* operon was deleted, and the *E. coli* TOP10 strain. This host insensitivity could be specific to repressors that are not encoded by the host strain, such as TetR, or repressors that are expressed at very low levels, such as LacI [@pmid:16591435].

### Functionality in other organisms

We chose p15a and pSC101 plasmids for these systems because we primarily apply them in *E. coli*, they transform efficiently, and they and have been successfully co-transformed in earlier work [@pmid:21933410]. However, these are narrow host-range plasmids, and it remains to be seen whether our expression systems will work well in broad host-range plasmids [@pmid:23980652], in other organisms, or upon chromosome integration. We expect that the system will be reasonably portable in hosts meeting some basic criteria. First, the P~LtetO-1~ and P~LlacO-1~ promoters are very strong, with sequences close to the *E. coli* σ~70~ consensus; this promoter much match promoter sequences recognized in another system. Second, we have created expression systems using a variety of ribosome binding sites with different translation rates [@pmid:29084263]; translation rates can be predicted from homology to 16S rRNA and other factors independent of the host [@pmid:24234441], and may need to be modified to achieve a desired range of induction. Third, we used the strong, Rho-independent rrnB T1 terminator [@pmid:8887568], which should work in a broad range of microbial hosts, but may be less effective in some. Lastly, the addition of an insulating transcriptional repressor ahead of the P~LtetO-1~ and P~LlacO-1~ promoters is likely to reduce sensitivity to transcription upstream of these constructs. We also note that noise for pJS101, with its lower-copy-number pSC101 replicon, is lower than that for pZH509 or pJS102 at similar expression levels (**Figure {@fig:pJS102-mean-noise}b**). This suggests that incorporating this construct into the chromosome, where copy number is more tightly regulated, may lead to further noise reduction.

### Possible applications

We expect that the expression plasmids introduced here will be useful for diverse applications in molecular biology. Expression and purification of heteromeric protein complexes could be improved by stoichiometric production of their components, mimicking proportional synthesis in natural systems [@pmid:30553725]. Additionally, low-noise expression can improve protein production yields [@pmid:27525986]. These systems could also be used in synthetic biology applications where yields can be improved by sequential induction of different components with low cell-to-cell variability. The capacity for low-noise expression at very low expression levels makes them particularly promising for single-molecule imaging experiments or for recombinant expression of low-copy-number components with low cell-to-cell variation to reproduce chromosomal expression levels. We see two major drawbacks to our gene expression system. First, the dynamic range of inducible expression is lower than for systems controlled by constitutively expressed transcriptional repressors [@pmid:9092630; @pmid:29084263], because some expression must occur at zero inducer concentration before negative feedback kicks in. While the dynamic range could possibly be expanded by increasing repressor binding strength or having a low level of constitutive repressor expression, we have yet to succeed in this. Second, TetR and LacI are expressed at different levels at different induction conditions. This could have off-target effects (*e.g.* from non-specific DNA binding); we have occasionally observed slow growth at very high induction levels (over 200 nM ATc for pZH509), but we have not tested whether this is due to high TetR expression or high GFPmut2 expression. 
